---
title: Drunken Stumble
date: 2012/12/07 00:00:00
permalink: http://www.drunkenstumble.org/drunken-stumble/
categories: General
---

![Drunken Stumble](/img/drunk.jpg "Drunken Stumble")

<div class="image-by">
Image by <a href="http://www.wayneadams.net">Wayne Adams</a>
</div>

Drunken Stumble a simple methodology for building software and software
systems. It has two parts:

Part 1 - Look to a point and lean *that-a-way*. This is "The Lean".

Part 2 - Let the forces of gravity and your reflexes propel you foward in an
automatic, inevitable series of steps. This is "The Stumble".

It's inspired by the remarkable efficacy of human locomotion in face of higher
brain impairment.

Maybe you've been there -- needing to get home or to the next bar, unable
to. In a gin soaked haze you summon the courage of The Stumble, knowing that if
you can stand you can walk. You lean, stumble, move forward and
repeat. Sometimes you're remarkably productive, other times you spin off and
fall. But it's working. And eventually you make it to your destination. Pride
long abandoned, you think only one thing: holy shit, it I made it!

If you don't have personal experience with this, you're a far better man or
woman than me.

When we build software or other complex systems, our higher brain is impaired,
like the drunk. It's impaied because we don't know the future, simple as
that. -- no need for a fancier explanation. In this impaired state, our only
resource is Drunken Stumble: lean toward a point and allow a series of
reflexive, automatic steps to propel work foward.

If the idea of modeling your professional work after a drunk is objectionable,
feel free to call this "Reflex Driven Development" or anything else that suits
you or your organization. Whatever you call the process, it has some remarkable
and surprising implications:

- Brilliantly successful software can be built *without design*

- There is no more efficient way to organize your work

# The Lean

Ideas are important, but we keep two things in mind:

- Ideas are not results -- they are guesses about the results we think we want

- A result -- the only thing we care about -- can only be achieved through
  a specific series of steps

We cannot move from A (now) to Z (our imagined result) without steps. While we
keep our end goal in mind, the goal only points us in a direction. It informs
our next obvious step, allowing us to reason about both *next* and *obvious*.

We are free to reevaluate our lean after every step.

A drunk knows he wants to go "that-a-way". He leans in that direction and lets
gravity and nature's programming kick in. He moves through time and space in
the general direction of that-a-way by a series of convulsive, inescapable,
propelling maneuvers. He might veer off, or even fall. But he recovers,
reassesses, and leans again.

The only purpose to the lean is to get the stumble going.

While ideas are important, turns out they're not *that* important.

This may come as a surprise if you're very smart, went to a top school, or
routinely out think your colleagues in design sessions. You're comparative
advantages is your ability to think big thoughts and inspire vision. You might
not like Druken Stumble. Instead of tapping the map and proclaiming,
"gentlemen, this is our objective, here's how we achieve it", you only
get to say, "fellas, that-a-way!"

The real work in The Stumble.

# The Stumble

The Stumble is this: only ever do the next obvious thing. The next obvious
thing must be inescapable -- a stumble reflex. It doesn't require thought. It's
*obvious*.

The *problem* -- i.e. what we work on -- is determining what's "obviously
next".

A drunk's stumble sequence is automatic. The body takes over. The only act of
the mind is in the lean, which is through gin soaked eyes. The stumble moves
him forward.

Projects move toward a point on the horizon (the lean) by a series of mindless,
automatic steps.

It's the most efficient way to achieve brilliant, beautiful results.

But obvious is not always obvious.

From [Google](https://www.google.com/search?q=define%3A+obvious]):

 > *ob·vi·ous*
 >
 > Adjective
 >
 > 1. Easily perceived or understood; clear, self-evident, or apparent.
 >
 > 2. Predictable and lacking in subtlety.

If you're working on anything that falls outside that definition, you're not
doing Druken Stumble.

Furthermore, Drunken Stumble insists that the next step be *next*. Something
may be obvious, but it is not *obviously next*. In fact, if a step isn't next,
it isn't obvious -- it's speculative. Only next steps can possibly be obvious.

The work of Drunken Stumble is to identify what's obviously next. It's hard
work.

What is obviously next to one person is not so to another. If there's
disagreement, participants must collaborate and negotiate until everyone agrees
on what's unqequivocally, obviously next.

Then you do that one thing. You *only* do that one thing.

What's obviously next is a byproduct of experience and expertise. You can't be
more experienced or knowledgable than you are. You can only develop better
intuition over time. You sense of obviousness and sequence will change
constantly.

It's better to work with people who have experience solving the types of
problems you're working on. But it's better still to work with people who
ascribe to Druken Stumble.

Drunken Stumble will always beat design.

It must.

# Why It Works

As surprising as it may be, Drunken Stumble *must* work. You're reading this
sentence now because of Drunken Stumble.

Consider how you got here:

- You are a product natural selection, a countless series of "choices" based on
  what works and what doesn't
- Nature always does "what's obviously next" -- indeed, it's an inevitable
  result according to the laws of physics

Natural selection is nature's *lean*. Mutations might cause an organisms DNA to
veer off course and even fall. But natural selection prunes the mistakes,
letting the beneficial changes survive, directing progress toward increasingly
robust organisms.

Throw a dark at *anything* that followed this process. Even the simplest
organism -- a virus -- has breaktaking, jaw dropping, fantastically impressive
design. Viruses were never designed.

This is encouraging for those of us who aren't geniuses -- even stupid things
can produce brilliant results.

Does Drunken Stumble sound about right now?

And if you're *still* uncomfortable with this idea and prefer to celebrate your
God given brain, creative ability, genius, etc. you're in luck! Druken Stumble
is *more* effective with smarter and more experienced people. Your "next
obvious step" will probably be more useful than someone else's. Druken Stumble
will let you work in more efficient steps and provide more data for your brain
to process than if you went off in a cornder and emerged with a master plan.

Just beware, if you don't use Drunken Stumble, you might get beat by the dolt
who does.

# Objections

Druken Stumble simulatneously sounds exactly right and terribly wrong. "Doing
the next obvious thing" sounds a lot like "agile" and is hardly
controversial. But this image of a drunken stumbler is hard to stomach.

People like to think of themselves as smart. Especially if they get paid for
being smart.

So the objections come.

## Don't Drink

Don't drink, then you can walk straight, fool!

But being drunk in this metaphore is not a matter of choice. Drunkenness
represents our inability to see into the future. If you can see into the
future, this whole thing falls apart. But you can't. No one can. Sorry, you're
just drunk.

If we're stuck being drunk, the question is how we conduct ourselves in that
state.

A drunk who doesn't know he's drunk is an embarassment to himself and people
around him. These are the egoists who think their ideas should be implemented
because they're correct *de jure*. They think by virtue of their IQ, education,
class, gender, experience, etc. they can solve problems by imagining a
solution. They're the drunk at the end of the table who's trying to be funny or
smart or charming, but who's comical at best and an antisocial asshole at
worst. Well, worst, he shows off how he can breathe fire with 100 proof vodka
and sets the bar ablaze killing everyone in it.

You might work with someone like that.

The smart drunk knows his judgement and physical abilities are impaired and
makes the best of it using the Lean, then Stumble. The smart drunk is humble
and kind. He doesn't have an ego because he's self aware. There's nothing to
brag about. There's only the need to get to the next destination, despite being
handicapped.

## I'm A Good Designer

I know a number of programmers who are truly gifted designers. I'm thinking of
them. Sadly, they have to hang up their design shoes forever.

You never design in Druken Stumble.

- It's more efficient not to design

- If your design has flaws, Druken Stumble will fix them

- If your design is perfect, Drunken Stumble will get there anyway

Consider the game Hang Man. It's simple: you fill in missing letters of a word
before a man hangs from the gallows. If you guess a letter that's in the word,
it's filled in and the man is safe. If you guess a letter that's not in the
word, the man moves one step closer to his grizzly death. When the man swings,
game over.

For a more formal treatment see
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hangman_(game)).

To illustrate the problem of design, let's add a new rule: instead of guessing
a letter, you're free to guess the whole word. If you guess the word, you win
in one step. If you fail to guess the word, your man moves a step toward the
gallows. (TODO: should have a bigger penalty -- maybe move 2 steps toward
death).

Now, a game!

 > A *beer maker*:  `_ _ _ _ _`

Okay, I'm a brilliant designer. When I look at that word I see "BELLS". It fits
perfectly! I'll use the new rule and guess the whole word -- gonna call the
shot, nothin' but net!

Wrong!

So it's not "BELLS" but what have I learned? Absolutely nothing. If I was
smart, I wold have said, "I think it's BELLS, so I'll guess B. Then if I'm
wrong, I can steer clear of beer makers with B."

But I didn't. I wanted to impress my friends.

This time I'll do the "next obvious thing". Since I really have no idea what
the answer is, I'll improve my odds by guessing the most common letter in
English, "E":

 > `_ _ _ _ E`

Excellent! My design instinct kicks in and I jump to "STONE". But I'm smart
this time and treat my *design* as a guess (a *lean*) -- I don't commit to it,
but I use it to inform my *next obvious step*, "S":

Miss!

Damn! I was pretty sure it was "STONE". Good thing I only spent one letter
guessing!

But what was obvious before is a mystery now. I'm going back to my old
strategy: guess commonly occurring letters. Trying "O":

 > `_ O _ _ E`

Bingo! It's got to be "ROGUE". But that's just my lean. Next obvious step is
"R":

 > `R O _ _ E`

Okay, I *know* it's "ROGUE" so I blurt that out in a victory cheer!

Wrong!

Now I'm in a rage! I gather myself and return to the process that's worked
best: pick the most likely letter based on statistical likelihood. I need a
consonant and I guess the most common one, "T":

 > `R O T _ E`

WTF is this??

Turns out, after a few more guesses, it's "ROTHE" -- the last name of a home
brewer who one some awards last year. Seriously, WTF!

I had been thinking commercial "beer makers" the whole time!

So what of design? It played mostly a distracting role in this process. But it
was useful in the lean. The real work though was in the steps. At each step I
got more information and was able to eventually get the answer.

It turns out the right answer was miles away from my initial guess.

What purpose did guessing "BELLS" serve? Guessing "B" was good enough. The
purpose of the guess was to show off, plain and simple.

Designs are fine, but they're guesses at best. The right answer will be
revealed in time anyway, so why invest all that time in design? Who are you
trying to impress?

Put your intellect and creativity to use in in other areas. Weren't you
impressed that I knew that "E" was the most common letter in the English
language? That had *absolutely nothing* to do with design. It was simple the
next obvious step. But it was clever nonetheless.

Not only did we get the right answer without design, we got a *surprising*
answer. Designs are not just inefficient and pointless, they're sometimes
horribly wrong, despite the brilliance of their authors.

And if you're not persuaded by my Hang Man example, maybe you'll listen
something more formidable in
[Dawkin's Weasel](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weasel_program).

## Bridge Building

It's hard to image something as simple as Drunken Stumble being useful for
bridge building.

I haven't the slightest idea how to build a bridge and so I won't claim that
Drunken Stumble is the right methodology for that type of structure.

But I suspect it is.

Remember, Drunken Stumble is predicated on only ever doing the next obvious
thing.

Get me in a room and ask me to use Druken Stumble for bridge building and I'll
say, "the next obvious thing is to call someone who's built a bridge".

With that person in the room, the next obvious thing might be to find an
architect.

With the architect, the next obvious thing might be to understand the purpose
and location of the bridge.

And so on.

Speaking from incredible ignorance, I *suspect* though that the process of
building a bridge is much simpler than building software. Bridges are really
analogous to software *configuration*. A bridge is bridge -- different forms
and functions, but still basically the same structure following the same design
principles that have been proven over thousands of years of human progress.

Software is nothing like a bridge. It can be anything. It could be a space
alien that breathes liquid methane and reproduces by cloning. It could be
creature that resembles an amoeba but lives in the Sun, part of it anyway. It
could be an intelligent wave form that originates from the ocean of a distant
planet and controls the minds of visiting space travelers.

You get the idea. You don't want to appeal to traditional models of building in
the physical word, which are contrained by gravity, weather, pests, and human
waste removal. Software follows an organic model and requires a differnt
methodology.

Druken Stumble *might* work for bridge building. It definitely works for
software.

## Mission Critical

Can Druken Stumble keep two planes from crashing into one another? Don't you
need to *design* that?

First, what *design* produced today's global air traffic control system?

Of course, it evolved. Everything evolves.

I would hold that the *only* way to build mission critical systems is Druken
Stumble.

## Footnotes

[^1]: While there may be a design, it's neither evident nor necessary -- from
all accounts, natural history is a Drunken Stumble.
